318

 

technology, just as quality science and technology

needs excellent higher education. The most

important factor that detenhines quality is the
qualiﬁcations of staff.

Universities are key to developing a nation. They

playthree main functions in society:

0 Firstly, they educate and train people with high-
level skills for the employment needs of the
public and private sectors.

0 Secondly, universities are the dominant
producers of new knowledge, and they
critique infom'iation and ﬁnd new local and
global applications for existing knowledge.
South Africa needs knowledge that equips
people fora changing society and economy.

0 Thirdly, given the country’s apartheid history,
higher education provides opportunities for
social mobility. It can strengthen equity, social
justice and democracy. In today’s knowledge
society, higher education is increasingly
important for opening up people’s

opportunities.

To increase the output of professionals, all parts of
the education system have to perform well. This is
why the Commission has identiﬁed improving the
quality of education outcomes throughout the

education system as one ofthe highest priorities.

Differentiation
South Africa has a differentiated system of university
education, but the system does not have enough

capacity to meet the needs of learners. Universities

of technology and comprehensive universities have

more than half their students enrolled on vocational
programmes, while traditional universities have an
almost equal spread of enrolments between
vocational, professional and general qualiﬁcations.
Traditional universities have a higher percentage ( l 4
percent) of enrolments at masters and PhD level
compared to the other two (2 percent and 3
percent respectively). lndicators such as doctoral
degree output, research output and the proportion

of staff with Ph Ds also show that research capacity is

concentrated in afew institutions.

A detailed analysis of the nature and extent of
differentiation in the university sector has been
done. Such analysis enables policymakers to make
sober decisions about funding, support and
perfonhance targets for the different kinds of

institutions.

Universities must:

0 Deﬁnetheirnichestoenhancetheirabilityto
contribute to national objectives

0 Provide a diversity of programme offerings
to learners

0 Develop capacity to provide quality
undergraduateteaching

0 Some must develop the capacity for cutting-
edge research training

0 Provide for ﬂexibility and innovation

throughoutthe system.

Building an expanded, differentiated university
system requires that other post-school institutions

function optimally. If the college sector functions

 

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

