   
  
  
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
    
  
  
   
 
  
   
  
   
 
   
  
   
 
  
  
  

O with the capacity to implement policy. Where
capacity is lacking, this should be addressed as an

urgent priority.

0 Teachers should be recognised for their efforts
and professionalism. Teaching should be a highly

valued profession.

0 Attention should be given to the continuing
development of teachers and promotion of
professional standards. Bodies such as the South
African Council for Educators and specialist subject
associations need to play a greater role in this.
Teachers must have a good knowledge of the
subjects they teach and cognitive competence in the
language in which they are required to teach. Subject
knowledge particularly needs strengthening in maths

and science.

0 The best teachers should be retained and new
ones attracted. Bursary programmes for continuing
professional development can improve the quality
of teaching and help to attract and retain teachers.
The pay structure for teachers should encourage

them to stay in the profession.

O The core business of schools is learning and
teaching, and the core task of principals is to ensure
their school ethos is conducive to these priorities.
Principals need to provide leadership on the
curriculum, as well as administration and manage—

ment.

0 Teaching in schools can be improved through
targeted support by district offices. District offices
should also ensure communication and information
sharing between the education authorities and

schools, and also between schools.

0 Top performing schools in the public and
private sectors must be recognised as national

assets. They should be supported and not saddled

CHAPTER 9: IMPROVING EDUCATION, TRAINING AND INNOVATION

with unnecessary burdens. Theirsupport should be
enlisted to assist underperforming schools. To
remain the beacons of our education system, they
need to be supported as well as held accountable

for performance based on an agreed set of

 

outcomes.

0 Providing meaningful information to parents on
their children's performance can enable them to

hold schools accountable.

  
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
   

Performance tends to improve
when parents are actively involved
and take an interest in the affairs of

the school.

School infrastructure
0 Ensure that all schools meet
minimum standards for infrastruc—
ture and commit to progres—
sively upgrading each
school's infrastructure to

meet optimum standards.

0 Target no—fee schoo
when planning infrastructure
compensate for resource deficits in com
ties. There should be well—equipped librarie ,
laboratories, computer and media centres to
ensure that learners in no—fee schools have access
to similar learning resources to their counterparts in

less poor communities.

0 Take learner safety into account when planning

infrastructu re.

0 High speed broadband should be readily
available and incorporated into the design of
schools. This will enable greater use of technology
in education and enhance the classroom experi—

ence for both teachers and students.

0 Explore the use of mobile devices such as

