   
 
  
  
   
 
   
  
   
  
     
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
    
 
  
   
  
  
  

institutions to increase access to affordable, high

quality education.

Meeting national development objectives and
responding to global trends requires changes in
planning and greater use oftechnology in delivering

training programmes.

Funding an enabling, high quality
differentiated system

Funding for higher education as a proportion of
GDP has declined marginally overthe last few years
from 0.76 percent in 2000 to 0.69 percent in 2009.
To preserve the quality of higher education,
additional funding will be needed to support an
increase in participation and knowledge

production.

Proposals for post-school funding

0 Base the revisions to the universities’ funding
framework that is currently being considered by the
Ministerial Committee for the Review of the
Funding of Universities on the needs of a
differentiated system, with adequate provision for

both teaching and research.

0 As the quality assurance and monitoring system
matures, greater emphasis should be placed on
incentivising graduate output. Such a shift would be
in line with the international trend towards greater
emphasis on output—based funding. The
Department of Higher Education and Training
would have to address the risk of discouraging
universities from taking students from deprived

backgrounds.

0 Provide all students who qualify for the National
Student Financial Aid Scheme with access to full
funding through loans and bursaries to cover the
costs of tuition, books, accommodation and other
living expenses. Students who do not qualify should

have access to bank loans, backed by state su reties.

Both the National Student Financial Aid Scheme and
bank loans should be recovered through
arrangements with the South African Revenue
Service. Service—linked scholarships should be
available in areas such as nursing, teaching and social

work.

0 Consider extending the National Student
Financial Aid Scheme to qualifying students in
registered private colleges as an incentive for private

sector expansion.

Supporting institutions in chronic distress

The Department of Higher Education and Training
should identify institutions that are in ongoing crisis
despite earlier interventions. Dedicated support
should be provided for comprehensive renewal
plans over five years. The plans should identify a
viable and sustainable academic path for the
institution, with an appropriate programme and
qualification mix. If measurable progress towards
achieving the objectives is not evident after five
years, consideration should be given to reviewing

the status ofthe institution.

NATIONAL RESEARCH AND
INNOVATION SYSTEM

In comparison to its population, South Africa's
science and innovation system is small by
international standards. The natural sciences
produce the most accredited research (36 percent
of the country's total research output), followed by
the humanities (2| percent) and medical and health
sciences (20 percent). From I995 to 2007, the
proportion of all scientific output produced by
universities increased from 80 percent to 86
percent, which means that universities are
increasing their dominance as knowledge

institutions in South Africa.

Research and development spending was

0.92 percent of GDP in 2007. By comparison,

CHAPTER 9: IMPROVING EDUCATION, TRAINING AND INNOVATION

 

325

