Proposals for results oriented mutual accountability

Schools can be intimidating for many parents of learners. In poor communities in particular, there is an imbalance in power relations. Parents often feel ill equipped to engage with teachers and school management about the performance of their children and the school as a whole. The absence of accessible performance indicators and the lack of feedback from teachers makes it difficult for parents to monitor their child's progress and engage with

the school.

This breakdown in the relationship between schools and parents also makes it more difficult for teachers to maintain discipline and hold learners

accountable for regular, punctual attendance.

0 Construct a results—oriented framework of mutual accountability where districts are accountable for supporting schools, including the nature of the support they provide, the number oftimes they have visited each school and whatthey did duringthe visits. Schools also need to be accountable to education authorities for their overall performance on key indicators. More importantly, schools should be accountable to the school community for the performance ofthe school in relation to the annual school plan. Finally, parents should be accountable for the behaviour, attitude, attendance and work ethic

of their children.

0 Provide all stakeholders with clear information on accountability measures. Accountability measures are likely to be met with resistance because they change the balance of power. At first, they will add to the workload of teachers and principals and put new obligations on

parents. Once systems and routines are

established, the workload will lessen and the system

will deliver benefits for everyone.

0 Each school should have a plan that maps out its goals for the academic year. Performance indicators, such as the rate of improvement on annual national assessment (ANA) results, curriculum coverage and teacher and learner attendance, should be monitored and regular reports provided to parents. The ANA results should be made accessible to parents and the community in a way that makes the data easy

to inte rp ret.

Reliable measures

0 Externally administer and mark the ANA for at least one primary school grade to ensure that there is a reliable, system—wide measure of quality for all primary schools. This will serve as a snapshot ofthe health ofthe system and help authorities to develop

targeted interventions.

Communityownership

0 Give additional support to governing bodies. School governing bodies have a clear legal mandate to oversee the governance ofschools. This includes extensive responsibility for finances and internal school policies. Many governing bodies are significantly hampered by parents' lack of expertise

and social status relative to school staff.

0 Develop a strong sense of community ownership. This encourages community members to assist with a range of tasks, such as helping to deliver the school nutrition programme, growing and supplying the school with vegetables and preparing meals, monitoring learner safety, and preventing vandalism and theft. School management will have to work with communities on an on—going basis to develop and maintain such a

sense ofownership.

CHAPTER 9: IMPROVING EDUCATION, TRAINING AND INNOVATION

 

 

311

