opportunities for graduates of the adult literacy campaign as well as other adult learners.

The location of the literacy campaign and the adult basic education and training programme in different departments is not ideal. Linkages need to be developed to ensure that learners who graduate from one programme do not face barriers in

advancingtheir studies in another programme.

Skills development

The sectoral education and training authorities (SETAs) were established in I997 and funded through the levy—grant system. They are expected to facilitate the delivery of sector—specific skills interventions that help achieve the goals of the National Skills Development Strategy and develop the skills needed by employers. There are currently 2| SETAs.

Current problems with the SETAs include:

0 Poor governance

0 Inadequate human resources

0 Poor administration and financial management

0 No proper monitoring and evaluation system

0 No accurate records of the number people who have benefited from the system and whatthe impact has been

0 Limited or no linkages with the post—school sector

Contributions ofthe SETA system include:

0 SETAs have facilitated the participation of private training providers in skills development. However, training has tended to be in the form of short courses and in many respects has not been tailored to the needs ofthe labour market.

0 Learnerships have facilitated entry to the

labour marketfor unemployed people.

Where there is efficient implementation SETAs

have had a positive impact, but skills shortages continue to choke the South African economy.

Proposals for the skills development sector 0 Improve relationships between education institutions and employers. SETAs have a crucial role in building relationships between education

institutions and the employers.

O Resolve the role ofthe skills development levy. The SETAs have a surplus of about R3 billion while other bodies, such as colleges and universities, are

financially constrained.

O Clarify the mission, purpose and mode of operation of the SETAs. The current system largely excludes public providers (further education and training colleges and universities) from providing training funded by SETAs and the National Skills Fund. A related issue is whether SETA funds can be used to fund new and potential employees or whether they are solely for the currently employed in levy—paying firms. The focus on existing employees makes it harder to build a strong relationship between SETAs and colleges and universities, which would be best placed to train

potential employees.

0 Social partners at the National Economic and Labour Development Council (NEDIJAC) need to debate whether the government, as a large employer, should contribute to the skills levy. Private sector firms and SETAs should take national priorities into account when planning and funding

training initiatives.

Regulation and quality assurance

Post—school education in South Africa is governed by an array of legislation and institutions. There is duplication, overlap and, at times, incoherence and

inconsistency.

The quality assurance framework is complex, with

CHAPTER 9: IMPROVING EDUCATION, TRAINING AND INNOVATION

 

 

323

