                             
              
               
             
                 

education system, state—owned enterprises and private industries. The system needs to function in a coherent and coordinated manner with broad common objectives aligned to national priorities. Special consideration should also be given to dedicated programmes in water, power, marine, space and software engineering, in which South Africa has both comparative and competitive advantages. Companies that focus on such programmes should provide internship programmes for experiential learning, specifically in

manufacturing and services.

0 Nurture and coordinate research capacity in higher education and link it to postgraduate studies. Improve coordination and supportfor partnerships between universities and other research and

innovation sites.

0 Transform the demographic composition of researchers in higher education, research councils and private research establishments. Put in place funding and research capacity development programmes to support young, female and black

researchers.

0 Increase support for postgraduate study at universities, for senior researchers, for partnerships between universities and industry. A more stable funding model is needed for all educational institutions that conduct research. Expand research

capacity and improve research output.

0 Develop a common policy framework on the critical role of science and technology, the role of higher education in shaping society, and the future of the country and its growth path. This should involve the Departments of Higher Education and Training, Science and Technology, Trade and Economic

Industry, Public Enterprises,

Development, and the National Treasury.

O Relax immigration requirements for highly skilled science and mathematics teachers, technicians and researchers. All graduates from foreign countries should be granted 7—year work permits. The movement of people, ideas and goods should be encouraged across the East and

Southern African region.

0 Revitalise science and mathematics by increasing the number of school leavers eligible to study science and mathematics—based subjects at

u n ive rs ity.

0 Develop a few world—class centres and programmes within both the national system of innovation and the higher education sector overthe next l8 years. The right to co—host the Square Kilometre Array project is an example. These should be in South Africa's areas of comparative and competitive advantage, including indigenous knowledge systems. Establish South Africa as a hub for higher education and training in the region, capable of attracting a significant share of the

international student population.

0 The government must create an investment climate that encourages the private sector to compete locally and internationally with innovative products, services and technologies. The freedom of scientists to investigate and of entrepreneurs to innovate is critical. The government must support collaboration between the business, academic and

public sectors.

Networks and partnerships

The national system of innovation is about networks and partnerships. Research and development happens in many sites outside universities, including the science councils, state—

owned enterprises and industry.

Partnerships are important for drawing togetherthe

CHAPTER 9: IMPROVING EDUCATION, TRAINING AND INNOVATION

 

327

