 

312

 

Proposals to improve school infrastructure

School infrastructure backlogs have been
considerably reduced over the past IO years. But
many school environments are still not conducive

to learning.

The Department of Basic Education has committed
itself to eradicating 496 inappropriate structures,
providing basic water to I 257 schools, providing
basic sanitation to 868 schools and providing
electricity to 878 schools in the 20l2/ I 3 ﬁnancial
year. To meet these commitments, the department
will haveto:

0 Find ways to deliver infrastructure and services

more efﬁciently and cost-effectively

0 Improve the quality of infomation used for

planning.

  
  
  
 

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

Factors affecting the continued backlogs:

O Vandalism andtheftofequipment

0 Natural disasters such as storms, ﬂoods and
ﬁres

0 Migration to urban areas puts pressure on
infrastructure in those areas, while other
schools are underused

O Escalating building costs even as the school
infrastructure budget has increased

0 Lack of capacity in planning, procurement,
project management, ﬁnancial management

and construction management.

In addition to suitable buildings, schools need access
to services such as water, sanitation and electricity.
The rollout of infrastructure for these services is
bedevilled by poor coordination between different
state agencies and local authorities, who are

responsible for providing infrastructure services.

Infrastructure shortages are particularly acute in
poor communities where learners are at a
signiﬁcant disadvantage. The no-fee school policy
and school nutrition
programme are important
interventions to mitigate the
negative effects of poverty on

learning.

In many rural areas schools
are the only public institution
communities have access to.
No-fee schools are typically
located in areas with low
levels of education, fragile
social networks, largely
dysfunctional community
structures, no community
libraries, limited access to
media, and few sources of
information about opportunities. Schools in

these communities should be strengthened and

 

 

