  
   
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
  
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
  

For many South African children life is a constant
struggle from a very young age. The coverage of
quality early childhood development services is
uneven. Apart from health services, early child hood
development services below Grade R are mainly
provided by private for—profit operators,
community—based organisations and large non—
governmental organisations (NGOs). Through a
family income means test, a per—child subsidy is
provided to registered centres. This covers over
400 000 children. However, because early
childhood development is still privately provided,
registered centres are unevenly distributed and do
not yet reach the most vulnerable poor children,
especially in rural areas. Fees also inhibitthe poorest
families from using what services are available. Early
childhood development programmes need to
expand, with government support, to reach all
vulnerable children, including children with

disabilities.

Life chances are shaped before birth. There are
2.8 million households and ||.5 million people
who are vulnerable to hunger, over 72 percent of
whom live in rural areas. Poverty affects the health,

dietary habits and health care of pregnant women.

Nationally, stunting affects almost one in five
children (I 8 percent), with higher levels of stunting
in rural areas (24.5 percent), and urban informal
areas (l8.5 percent). About one in IO children
(9.3 percent) are underweight, reflecting the
severity ofchild under—nutrition. Children, pregnant

and breastfeeding women and those living with
tuberculosis (TB) and HIV/AI DS are most at risk.

Micronutrient deficiency is also a problem. One in
four women lacl<s vitamin A and about a third of
women and children are iron deficient. A third of
preschool children are vitamin A deficient,

2| .4 percent are anaemic and 5 percent sufferfrom

iron—deficiency anaemia. About a third of very
young children do not get enough food and
nutrition, affecting their growth, health, cognitive
development and full participation in society.

Nowhere is this more evident than in South Africa's

 

poor schooling outcomes and low sl<ills base.

Nutrition programme for mothers and
infants

Children entering primary school in 20|2 will be
working in 2030. How healthy they are, how well
theyfunction, howwellthey do at school and in the
labour market depends on the decisions the

government and all in society mal<e now.

Bhutta, et al highlighted the I OOO—day window of
opportunity from pregnancy to 24 months as a
critical period in the development of a child.
Essential early measures to give each child a better
start in life can be delivered through a two—year
programme for mothers and infants including:
0 Vulnerable caregivers

O Adequate nutrition including micronutrients
O Immunisation
O Protectionfromdestitution
0

Care and stimulation.

The Department of Health interacts with pregnant
women, new mothers and young children as part of
its antenatal and postnatal services. It is well placed to
lead on health care and nutrition, with support from
the Department of Social Development through
home and community—based services. The primary
health care strategy for child health in South Africa,
Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI)
has a Care for Child Development (CCD) module
that supports mothers and other caregivers to
stimulate children's development through age—
appropriate language and play. An expansion of IMCI
and CCD should be piloted as part of the broader

effort to improve early childhood development.

CHAPTER 9: IMPROVING EDUCATION, TRAINING AND INNOVATION 299

