management capacity of principals and heads
of departments. At a minimum, this
development should cover training in the key
responsibilities of principals and members of

school senior managementteams.

0 Teacher development should include training
on curriculum pacing and the subject content
that teachers find difficult to teach. Given the
large numbers ofteachers, ICT should be used
as one of the ways of delivering teacher

development.

0 Different stakeholders should collaborate
under a single national initiative to pool
resources. Many international donors, private
companies, corporate foundations, charitable
organisations, NGOs, faith—based
organisations and individuals have initiatives
under way or are willing to be part ofa national
initiative. The national initiative should provide
a framework that gives direction to these

individual efforts.

0 Work with communities to address
socioeconomic factors like nutrition and safety

that impact on learning.

   
   
  
  
   
   
  
  

The national initiative should be under the auspices
ofthe Department of Basic Education, but draw on
expertise in institutions that are already working on
school improvement as well as those that have the

potential to make a contribution.

The initiative should be piloted in a sample of
schools and expanded over time. Interventions
should be inversely proportional to school
performance. Schools performing well will not be
expected to do tasks designed for poorly
performing schools. And schools with the lowest

performance will receive the closest attention.

POST-SCHOOL

The post—school system comprises a wide range of
institutions with different objectives and meeting
different needs. These institutions can be
developed to accommodate more learners.
Institutions should collaborate to build on each

others' strengths.

The current post—school system comprises:

0 Further education and training colleges, which
focus mainly on vocational education and
training

Private providers at colleges and universities
Adult education institutions

Universities

OOOO

Sectoral education and training authorities,
generallycalledtheskillsdevelopmentsector
O The regulatory and quality assurance

framework.

The goal is to have a post—school system that
provides quality—learning opportunities to young
people, adults who want to change careers or
upgrade skills, people who have left school before
completing their secondary education and
unemployed people who wish to start a career.
Post—school institutions should provide programmes

and services that meetthe range of needs.

Vision for the post-school system

The Commission is in agreement with the vision for
South Africa's post—school system set out in the
Green Paper for Post—School Education and
T‘aining (DHET, ZOIZ). The Green Paper

p*omotes higher education as an expanded,

 

e"ective, coherent and integrated system. Higher

education institutions should be supported by

 

 

 

e "ective regulatory and advisory institutions.

The Commission would add to DHET’s vision the
need to build national institutions for science,

technology and innovation to develop intellectual

CHAPTER 9: IMPROVING EDUCATION, TRAINING AND INNOVATION

 

315

