Long-term goals for basic education Improving the performance of the South African education system requires hard work and focus. The Commission proposes that specific focus over the next I 8 years should be on improving literacy, numeracy/mathematics and science outcomes; increasing the number of learners eligible to study maths and science—based degrees at university; improving performance in international comparative studies; retaining more learners.
Improve literacy, numeracy/mathematics and science outcomes: The Department of Basic Education aims to increase to 90 percent the number of learners in grades 3, 6 and 9 who have mastered the minimum competencies in language and numeracy by the end of each year. The Commission proposes that the required competency levels be defined as 50 percent and above. In other words, 90 percent of learners in grades 3, 6 and 9 must achieve 50 percent or more in the annual national assessments in these subjects.
Increase the number of students eligible to study maths and science at university: In 20| I, I20 767 learners were eligible for a bachelor's programme, down from I26 37| in 20 I 0. The Department of Basic Education's plan is to increase the number to 300 000 by 2024, with 350 000 learners passing mathematics and 320 000 learners passing physical science. The Commission proposes a target for 2030 of 450 000 learners being eligible for a bachelor's programme with maths and science. Action is required throughout the education system, but particularly in early childhood development given that the cohort that will enter university in 2030 has not yet started primary school. Consideration should be given to expanding the Dinaledi Schools initiative, which increases access to maths and science in underprivileged schools.
Improve performance in international comparative studies: The Department of Basic Education aims to improve South Africa's average Southern and East African Consortium for Monitoring Education Quality results for grade 6 languages and maths from 495 to 600 points by 2022. And to improve average grade 8 scores in the Trends in Mathematics and Science Study CTIMSS) from 264 to 420 points by 2023. The Commission proposes that grade 8 scores in the round ofTIMSS closest to 2030 should reach 500 points.
South Africa needs to develop and strengthen collaboration with other education systems in the English—speaking world and the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India and China) to ensure that students from the South African education system are equipped to be admitted into those systems. International collaboration in education will help South Africa to successfully tacl<le its education challenges. Stronger educational links with these countries will also help students to become increasingly broadminded in terms of how they look at both South Africa and the widerworld.
Retain more learners: South Africa loses half of every cohort that enters the school system by the end of the I2—year schooling period, wasting significant human potential and harming the life—chances of many young people. Secondary school completion rates are 77 percent in the United States, 87 percent (tothe age of l6) in the United Kingdom and 93 percent in Japan. South Africa should aim for a comparable completion rate of between 80—90 percent, including learners in further education and training (FET) colleges. Compulsory education should be extended to successful completion of Grade l2 in basic education or the equivalent level in the post-school sector. FET colleges should provide a meaningful vocational education alternative to secondary schooling. There needs to be alternative post-secondary education of good quality for learners who cannot, or choose not to, go to university.
