314

 

NGOs. The Department of Basic Education has
established a delivery unit to work with schools in
underperforming districts throughout the country.
The current level of consensus among stakeholders
and the will to work together constitute an
important moment in South African society and an

opportunitythat we need to build on.

It is difficult to get different groups to agree to work
together, even if it is in their collective interests. In
divided societies like South Africa, levels of trust are
low and groups tend to prioritise their immediate
sectoral interests. When parties do agree, it can be

difﬁcult to keep to the terms of the agreement.

The QLTC Code for Quality Education pledge and
the Basic Education Accord set out what each party
should do to improve the quality of education, but
implementation has been patchy. Anew agreement
will not lead to improvements unless we focus on

the obstacles to implementing existing agreements.

The public signing of an agreement represents an
important symbolic commitment by leadership and
a public statement of what is important. This should
not be a once-off event. Leaders must engage with
each other on a continuous basis and repeatedly

reafﬁrm theircommitmentto the pact.

0 Build consensus on the education pact. The
pact must be meaningful to all education

stakeholders and to all South Africans.

O Monitorthe pact at the school level. Provide
the school community with regular
information so that local solutions can be

found.

The Commission is proposing a painstaking process
of mobilisation and continued engagementwith the
education pact. All political leaders, inside and

outside of parliament, in provincial legislatures and

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

councils, should commit to the education pact and
use it when they do their constituency work.
Leaders of sports and faith-based organisations,
unions, NGOs, corporations, cooperatives,
student organisations, governing bodies, traditional
leaders and traditional healers should discuss the

pact and address obstacles to implementation.

The importance of education to the future of South
Africa demands a non-partisan approach. South
Africans should agree that differences and
grievances should never be allowed to disrupt

education.

A national initiative to improve learning
outcomes

Drawing on the existing consensus on the need to
work together, the Commission proposes a
national initiative involving all stakeholders to drive
efforts to improve learning outcomes in schools,
starting with the worst performers. The focus
should be on schools and districts and address
weaknesses in teaching,

management,

administrative support and accountability.

A6 a short to medium-term intervention, it should:
0 Use strategies that compensate for
weaknesses in schools and district
0 Provide intervention tools that do not
require high levels of capacity

0 Help build capacity.

Each of the broad elements of the initiative will have
detailed plans and realistic implementation

strategies.

0 Ensure that districts have the capacity to
support curriculum delivery. Each district
should have a team that ensures that each
school has the required material and the
knowledge and skillsto use it. Districts should

0 help to develop the leadership and

