Link the pay structure to career paths and reward good teachers.
Improving performance: Many education experts are critical of the idea of inl<ing teacher pay to the performance of learners 3ecause it ignores other factors affecting learner Derformance, such as the socioeconomic status of earners, parent involvement, learning bacl<logs, and school infrastructure and resources. Teachers in DOOI’ areas would be penalised forfactors they have no control over, and teachers in rich schools would 3e more likely to benefit. The Commission therefore proposes that incentives be directed at schools ratherthan at individual teachers to focus on those areas where teachers worl<ing collectively can make a difference.
Reward schools that show continuous improvements in their annual national assessments. To target incentives at where they are most needed, design the incentives to prescribe that schools should improve their results by IO percent or more to qualify. Many of the schools in afﬂuent areas are already performing at high level with pass rates above 80 percent and are unlikely to improve their results by IO percent.
Ensure that improvements are sustainable by prescribing that schools must show improvement over three consecutive years to qualify for rewards.
Maintain acareful balance between making the conditions too difficult so that it is not worthwhileforschoolstoworl<towardsthem, or so easy that they make no difference to performance.
Proposals for improving school management: The core business of schools is learning and teaching. The main responsibility of a school principal should be to lead the core business of the school.
Appropriately qualiﬁed and competent principals: Change the appointment process to ensure that competent individuals are attracted to become school principals. As in other senior management positions, candidates should undergo a competency assessment to determine their suitability and identify the areas in which they would need development and support.
Eliminate union influence in promoting or appointing principals. Unions play an important role in recruitment to ensure that proper procedures are followed, but not in deciding who gets promoted or appointed. Most of the undue influence by unions is possible because the district officials responsible for recruitment and human resources management have a limited understanding of labour laws. The Department of Basic Education and provincial departments of education must ensure that human resources management capacity is improved.
Implement an entry qualification for principals. In 2007, the Department of Education introduced an entry qualification for aspiring principals with a view to improving educational outcomes. The Advanced Certificate in Education (ACE) was piloted nationally. The External Evaluation Research Report of the Advanced Certiﬁcate in Education did notﬁnd clear evidence of short-term gains in matric results at the schools where principals had undergone ACE training. The fact that the evaluation was done only two years after the qualiﬁcation was introduced may explain its limited impact and the evaluation results should not be used to discredit and discontinue the implementation of an entry qualiﬁcation for principals. The results of the evaluation must be used to improve and strengthen this programme. The qualiﬁcation (or its adaptation) should continue to be offered as in-service training for incumbent principals.
