304

 

phones and tablets in distributing learning content.

Curriculum, incentives, inclusivity and
language issues

0 Avoid disruptive changes to the curriculum.
Keeping curriculum changes to a minimum will
enable teachers to develop the core skills and

competence to deliverthe curriculum.

0 Introduce incentive schemes linked to the
annual national assessments to reward schools for
consistent improvements. Avoid entrenching
historical inequalities by ensuring that the incentives
reward schools according to the rate of

performance improvements.

0 Provide inclusive education that enables
everyone to participate effectively in a free society.
Education provides knowledge and skills that
people with disabilities can use to exercise a range
of other human rights, such as the right to political
participation, the right to work, the right to live
independently and contribute to the community,
the right to participate in cultural life, and the right to
raise a family. Ensuring that all children with
disabilities have access to quality education will help
South Africa meet its employment equity goals in

the long run.

   
   
   
    
  
 
  
 
 
  
  

O Learners’ home
language should be
used as a medium

of instruction for
longer and English

introduced much
earlier in the
foundation phase.

Training and

effective

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

support materials should be available for teachers
and learners to facilitate the transition to English as

the language of learning and teaching.

0 Introduce career guidance at the senior phase
of primary school to ensure that learners are aware
of further educational opportunities and can make
informed career choices. Programmes to expose
learners at the earliest stages of primary school to
different careers also should be supported. Career
guidance helps expose learners to opportunities
and should be an integral part of the school
curriculum. This will help reduce the high number

of learners who drop out.

Sports, arts and culture

0 Encourage sports and physical education. They
are an integral part of the holistic development of a
learner. Schools are where talent is identiﬁed,
career choices made (including careers in sport) and
habits learnt. Given the growing problem of obesity,
the habit of leading an active life-style can be
developed at a young age through participation in
sport. Working with the Department of Sport and
Recreation, the Department of Basic Education has
reintroduced school sport. This positive initiative

needs to be expanded.

O Expose learners to history, heritage and
culture. History, heritage and culture are important
for understanding the past, analysing the present
and planning for the future. They foster social
understanding and cohesion, which is important for
social and economic stability and growth. The arts
inspire creativity and innovation and also build social
cohesion. A holistic education widens career path
choices and develops audiences and consumers in
different sectors of the economy. The Department
of Arts and Culture and the Department of Basic
Education are developing plans to revitalise arts and

culture in schools.

