310

 

piloted nationally. The External Evaluation Research Report of the Advanced Certiﬁcate in Education did notﬁnd clear evidence of short-term gains in matric results at the schools where principals had undergone ACE training. The fact that the evaluation was done only two years after the qualiﬁcation was introduced may explain its limited impact and the evaluation results should not be used to discredit and discontinue the implementation of an entry qualiﬁcation for principals. The results of the evaluation must be used to improve and strengthen this programme. The qualiﬁcation (or its adaptation) should continue to be offered as in-

servicetrainingfor incumbent principals.

Performance management

0 Introduce perfomiance contracts for principals and deputy principals, in line with Department of Basic Education policy. Use these contracts to help principals ﬁnd ways to improve their perfonhance every year, including identifying their training needs. Over time performance contracts should also be introduced for other members of school senior

management teams (SMT).

0 Replace principals who repeatedly fail to meet performance targets, based on monitoring

information and interviews with school stakeholders.

0 Use data from the perfonhance management

systems to identify areas where principals need more

training and possibly to update the ACE curriculum.

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

Powers of principals

O Gradually give principals more administrative powers as the quality of school leadership improves, including in ﬁnancial management, the procurement of textbooks and other educational material, and human resources management. These delegations ensure that principals are held accountable for their schools. Provincial departments will remain the employer of educators, and wages will continue to

be centrally detemiined.

Proposals for improving district support

0 Create capacity in districts so that they can support schools to deliver the curriculum. Districts require skills and expertise in curriculum management, project management, data analysis, monitoring, planning, reporting, accounting and problem solving in order to provide effective support. Many of the weaknesses in schools are a reﬂection of weaknesses at the district level. Curriculum experts at district level should support teachers, and managers should support principals and heads of departments. Districts should also be responsible for planning for the academic year in each school, making sure that each school has all the necessary materials, and designing interventions to

support underperfom'iing schools.

0 Deploy multidisciplinary support teams to

work with districts in the short to medium term.

 

