   
   
   
  
  
   
 
   
  
   
   
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
  
   
  
   
    

0 Address the coordination weaknesses
between the different sectors and departments
responsible for early childhood development
services in order to strengthen collaboration. The
Commission will work with the respective
departments to find a solution to the perennial
coordination challenge in the delivery of early

childhood development services.

0 Standardise the guidelines, norms and
standards for early childhood development
programmes. The Department of Basic Education
has a set of guidelines for the planning of public
schools, which also sets out requirements for
Grade R facilities. The Department of Social
Development published regulations in 2009 that
set out national norms and standards for drop—in
centres in terms of the Children's Act of 2005.
These guidelines, norms and standards must be
standardised and should take into account the

needs ofchild ren with disabilities in all communities.

0 Encourage innovation in the way early child—
hood development services are delivered. Home
and community—based early childhood development
interventions should be piloted in selected districts.
Financing for this initiative could involve working
closely with foreign donors and private sector fund—

ers. External finance is useful as away ofpiloting new

CHAPTER 9: IMPROVING EDUCATION, TRAINING AND INNOVATION

initiatives not for basic funding of early childhood
development programmes, which the state must

provide.

Improve state funding for early childhood
development. Current funding mechanisms are not
adequate for the expansive early childhood
development programme reflected in this plan. It is
important to test and develop funding models that

coverthe comprehensive package of services.

Strengthen coordination between departments, as
well as the private and non—profit sectors. Focus
should be on routine day—to—day coordination
between units ofdepartments that do similar work.
Officials who work on issues that affect children
should find effective ways to deliver programmes
and resolve problems across departments and
sectors ratherthan wait for coordination at the level

ofdirectors general.

Invest in training early childhood development
practitioners, upgrading their qualifications and

developing clear career paths.

Provide governmental support for training,
resource and other intermediary agencies so that

they can support community—based programmes.

 

301

