316

 

capital and spur economic growth and development. This system needs to be supported by effective governance and funding mechanisms to

promote coordination and collaboration.

South Africa needs a post-school system that provides a range of accessible options for younger and older people. The system should be capable of adapting to changes in technology, industry, population dynamics and global trends. Accelerating economic growth requires science, technology, vocational and technical skills, and they need to be produced quickly. To promote lifelong learning, post-school institutions should accept students who are academically less prepared and

provide them with targeted support.

Role of the post-school sector

0 Contribute towards quality learning and teaching in the entire education system from pre-school through to higher education. Teachers in schools, ECD centres and colleges

are trained in universities. O Respond to the skills needs of all sectors of society including business, industry and the

government.

0 Raise education and training levels to produce

highly skilled professionals and technicians.

0 Provide lifelong learning opportunities for a

wide range of candidates.

0 Develop partnerships to play a strong role in

national and regional initiatives. 0 Conduct and disseminate research. 0 Promote technology transferthrough research

studies done in collaboration with local and

foreign ﬁrms.

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

O Enhance research, development and

technology infrastructure.

0 Strengthen the foundations for good governance by enabling citizens to participate meaningfully in the social, economic and

political life ofthe country.

Overview of the current post-school system

The South African post-school system is not well designed to meet the skills development needs of either the youth or the economy. Approximately three times as many students enter universities each year compared to those entering colleges. In 20 l O, universities enrolled around 950 000 students while

Public adult

learning centres enrol approximately 300 000

colleges enrolled about 300 000.

learners who are studying part-time for Grade l2 and adult basic education training learners. Private providers are playing an increasingly important role in the post-school sector. Enrolments in private higher education institutions are estimated to range from 80 000 to l20 OOO learners. A large number of private providers offer FET courses funded

through the skills levy.

Though some institutions perform well and have the academic expertise and infrastructure to be internationally competitive, many lack adequate capacity, are under-resourced and inefﬁcient. Access and opportunities are inequitably distributed. The growth of enrolments in private institutions also indicates that the public system is not responsive to

the needs of all students.

Universities

In 2030, South Africa will have over IO million university graduates with a minimum of a bachelor’s degree. This takes into account the current number of graduates and the targets proposed in this plan.

This will be a 300 percent increase over a 30-year period (200i — 2030). There will be roughly

