324

 

overlapping directives and on-going contestation between different quality assurance bodies. The main bodies responsible for quality assurance are the three quality councils: the Council on Higher Education (CHE), Umalusi, and the Quality Council for Trades and Occupations (QCTO). Previously, SETAs perfom'ied quality assurance functions largely directed at the private training providers they fund. Professional bodies, such as the Engineering Council of South Africa, are a fourth category of

quality assurance body.

The complexity and overlaps in the regulation and

quality assurance systems need to be addressed.

Structural and systemic issues

Mobility within the education system should be supported through clear standards and procedures. Students should be able to move between colleges and universities, between different universities, between schools and post-school institutions, and between educational provision and the world of work. To do this, they need information on what

different institutions offer.

Each post-school institution must have a clear identity and mission, including further education and training colleges. FET colleges continueto offer

traditional theoretical training for apprenticeships

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

through the old formal technical college instructional programmes popularly known as Nated programmes and the National Certiﬁcate Vocational. Delivering these programmes in a single

institution is difficult and can be confusing.

There should be programmes to upgrade the skills of college lecturers, in partnership with industry. Industry experts should be encouraged and incentivised to spend time teaching in colleges, and college lecturers should be encouraged to spend time in the workplace updatingtheir knowledge and skills. College teaching should be made attractive to

good lecturers and students.

The evolution of the post-school system should always be guided by the principle of providing

learning opportunities for all students.

Drivers of change

Private and public institutions mustworktogetherto create the educational infrastructure needed to support a thriving economy. The globalisation of labour and technology markets requires education systems to collaborate across national borders and

across sectors.

Demographic changes are placing increasing

demands on governments and educational

 

