306

 

the age of l6) in the United Kingdom and
93 percent in Japan. South Africa should aim for a
comparable completion rate of between
80—90 percent, including learners in further
education and training (FET) colleges. Compulsory
education should be extended to successful
completion of Grade l2 in basic education or the
equivalent level in the post-school sector. FET
colleges should provide a meaningful vocational
education alternative to secondary schooling.
There needs to be alternative post-secondary
education of good quality for learners who cannot,

or choose not to, go to university.

Proposals to improve human capacity

Human capacity weaknesses are pronounced in
teaching, management and district support
structures. Over the next l8 years, the following
actions will need to be given attention. Some of the
actions will be short to medium-term and others

will be mediumto long-tem'1.

Produce more and better qualiﬁed
teachers

The number of teachers produced each year has
increased noticeably, but there are still shortages of
teachers for certain subjects and age-groups.
Subjects with teacher shortages include languages,
mathematics, science, technology and the arts. The
shortages are compounded bythe factthatteachers
who specialise in these subjects are not always
assigned to teach them. There are shortages in the
foundation phase and early childhood
development. Geographically, shortages are acute

in township and rural schools.

One of the main reasons South Africa needs more
teachers is to reduce class sizes. Class sizes impact
on learner performance. Small classes allow
teachers to give more attention to individual
learners. In South Africa, for everyteacher there are

33 learners, compared to Botswana where the

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

ratio is |:22, which is one of the lowest
teacher/learner ratios in the world. The
Department of Basic Education estimates that to
achieve the same ratio as Botswana, the public

sector has to employ l 60 000 more teachers.

The solution to the weaknesses in teacher capacity is
not simply to train more teachers or for existing
teachers to gain higher qualiﬁcations. Teachers cert-
iﬁed as qualiﬁed increased from 54 percent in I990
to 94 percent, but outcomes have remained poor.

0 South Africa needs to improve the quality of
teacher training, and recruit higher calibre
candidates. The Integrated Strategic P/ann/ngr
Framework for Teacher Education and
Deve/opment in South Aﬂ7'ca 20/ /—2025,
provides a useful framework. It needs to be

strengthened and there should be incentives to

ensure it is implemented effectively.

0 In the short to medium term, recruit foreign
teachers in the areas of critical shortages and grant
seven-year working permits to foreign students

graduating in South African universities.

0 Explore non-conventional approaches to
attracting and preparing teachers, such as
professionals from other areas entering teaching
(second-career professionals), on the job training,
and fast-track entry systems for experienced

professionals.

0 Create an institutional environment that allows
educators in private schools to move back to the

state system.

The availability of teachers in all subjects in all
schools requires:

0 Expandingtrainingcapacity

O Investigating new ways of attracting teachers

0 Removing entry difﬁculties for teachers who

have left the profession, foreign teachers, and

