320

 

0 Provide performance-based grants to build
capacity and develop centres or networks of
excellence within and across institutions. Given that
performance-based grants, can entrench historical
privilege and disadvantage, capacity-building grants
should be provided with clear targets for

improvement in ﬁve-year intervals.

0 Offer extra support to underprepared learners
to help them cope with the demands of higher
education. Many individuals with poor schooling
aspire to higher qualiﬁcations, but they are
academically less prepared than their middle class
counterparts. Support programmes should be

offered and funded at all institutions.

0 Expand the use of distance education. The
advances in lCT can help overcome the
infrastructure limits to further expansion of higher
education. Upfront investment is needed in
technology, curriculum design, quality assurance
and monitoring. The Department of Higher
Education and Training has published a draft policy
statement intended to provide a framework for
expanding the use of distance education in higher

education. The Commission supports this initiative.

0 Private providers will continue to be important
partners in the delivery of education and training at
all levels. Ensuring the quality of private provision
requires enabling regulation, quality assurance, and

monitoring and evaluation of programmes.

Colleges

Approximately 65 percent of college students are
unable to ﬁnd work experience, which is a
requirement for completing National Technical
Diplomas popularly known as N diplomas. The
college sector is intended as a pathway forthose who
do not follow an academic path, but it suffers from a
poor reputation due to the low rate of employment

of college graduates.

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

The college sector needs to be expanded, but this
must be preceded by clarity about its vision and role.
The priority is to strengthen colleges, address quality
teaching and learning, and improve perfom'iance. A
critical indicator of perfom'iance is the throughput
rate and the ability of college programmes to provide

the skills South Africa needs.

Colleges are the backbone of technical vocational
education and training. Their target group includes
young people in the FET phase who chose the voc-
ational pathway, adults who want to change careers
or upgrade skills, and unemployed people who wish
to start a career. Colleges should be strengthened to
become institutions of choice for the training of

artisans and producing other mid-level skills.

0 Improve the throughput rate to 75 percent by
2030. This would have a major impact on South

Africa’s skills proﬁle.

0 Produce 30 000 artisans per year by 2030

0 Promote lifelong learning to complement post-

school education.

0 Provide funding certainty to ensure that colleges
employ staff and give them job security. This will
ensure that colleges attract and retain skilled and

experienced college staff.

0 Support the development of specialised
programmes in universities focusing on training
college lecturers. Provide funding for universities to

conduct research on the vocational education sector.

0 Build the capacity of FET institutions to become
the preferred institutions for vocational education
and training. Learners should be able to choose the
vocational pathway before completing Grade l2.
Expand the geographical spread of FET institutions to

ensure that learners who choose to pursue a

