  
  
    
 
  
 
 
   

308

 

 

training opportunities. Courses that are in line with
the requirements of the teacher’s job must be fully
subsidised by the government and should take
place outside term time. On completion of the
course or professional development activities,
teachers should earn points towards meeting

the continuing Professional

‘

Te a c h e r
Development re-
quirements of the South African

Council for Educators.

O Expose teachers to the use of technology in
their own training, and train them to use it in their
teaching. Greater use of technology backed by
high-speed broadband could open new
opportunities not currently available for learners in

disadvantaged schools.

0 Investigate introducing professional
certiﬁcation. Newly qualiﬁed teachers would need
to demonstrate certain competencies before they
are employed in schools, and after that they would
be offered preliminary or probationary certiﬁcation,
to be finalised based on demonstrated
competence. The professional certiﬁcation of all
teachers would need to be renewed periodically
(for example, every ﬁve years), serving as an
incentive for teachers to undertake continuous

professional development.

Professional associations

0 Allow a wide range of training providers to

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

offer professional development courses for
teachers, subject to approval by the South African

Council for Educators.

0 Support professional associations working
more closely with teachers to provide professional
development opportunities, disseminate
information about best practices and provide
updates on cutting-edge research in particular
school subject areas. In subject areas where
professional associations do not exist, provide

incentives to stimulate their establishment.

Teacher unions

Teacher unions are crucial to improving the
education system. Experience in other countries
shows that without a good level of professional
expertise among union leaders, it is difficult to get
unions to move beyond the issue of salary
increments to the core professional concern of

improving the quality of education.

0 Investigate ways of working with unions to

reach their members.

0 Sponsor advanced studies for union leaders as

part of a constructive partnership.

0 Assist unions in developing the capacity to
implement continuous professional
development strategies for their members.
Over time, accredit professional development
institutes linked to unions so that they can offer
continuous professional development that
earns points towards meeting the Continuing
Professional Teacher Development
requirements of the South African Council for

Educators.

Remuneration
0 Change the pay structure for teachers.

Bursaries alone will not attract enough top-

