300

 

Universal access to early childhood
development

In 2030 in South Africa, there will be about 4 million
children under 3, nearly 2 million in the 4—5 years
age group and just under I million 6-year-olds. The
majority of these children will be in urban areas, but
there will also be a signiﬁcant number in rural areas.
Plans for early childhood development
infrastructure and services need to differentiate
between the needs of urban and rural areas. There
are differences in these areas that require

customised approaches.

The interventions should be different for children of
different age groups. The youngest (0—3 years) are
best served through clinic, home and community-
based programmes that focus on working with
families. 4—5 year old children beneﬁt from some

structured learning in group programmes.

The quality and coverage of early childhood
development services for children aged 0—4 is poor.
Grade R is currently the strongest element of
preschool learning and support. It links early
childhood development services to primary
schools. This method should be extended to
include four and ﬁve year olds. But it would have to
build on aﬁm'ierfoundation of child nutrition, health
and development from pregnancy to three years of
age, without which children will not be able to take

advantage of an expanded preschool experience.

Early childhood development services should be
ﬂexible, and responsive to the needs of children,
families and communities. Some services need to
be targeted directly at children, while others

provide support to their primary caregivers.

It is also essential that everybody has access to
services of a consistently high standard regardless of
who they are and where they live. Speciﬁc

consideration should be given to the most

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

vulnerable children —those who are living in
poverty, at a great distance from existing services, or

with disabilities.

Universal access to quality early childhood
development for children aged 0—3 must be made
available and have a strong nutrition and educational
focus. Although early childhood development may
continue to be provided through the private sector,

a stronger role forthe government is essential.

The central challenges include:

0 Fundingfor infrastructure and staff

0 Trainingforteachers

O Learner support materials and equipment

0 Strengthening of support agencies

0 Reaching the most vulnerable children and

families

0 Ensuring that departments responsible for
different aspects of early childhood

developmentworktogether.

Proposals for early childhood development
0 Make early childhood development a top
priority among the measures to improve the quality
of education and long-term prospects of future
generations. Dedicated resources should be
channelled towards ensuring that children are well
cared for from an early age and receive appropriate
emotional, cognitive and physical development

stimulation.

0 Broaden the deﬁnition of early childhood
development, taking into account all the
development needs of a child. Use the expanded

deﬁnition as the basis for all strategies.

0 Make 2 years of quality preschool enrolment

for4 and 5 year olds compulsory before Grade I .

0 Deﬁne and phase in a comprehensive package

ofservices for all young children.

