    
  
   
  
  
   
 
   
   
  
   
  
  
  
   
   
  
    
   
   
  

optimally, the pressure on universities to offer lower
level diplomas and certiﬁcates will be reduced. This

will allow universities to focus on their niche.

Proposals for universities

0 Improve the qualifications of higher education
academic staff. South Africa needs to increase the
percentage of PhD qualified staff in the higher
education sector from the current 34 percent to
over 75 percent by 2030. Higher Education South
Africa (H ESA) has developed a detailed proposal for
a National Programme to develop the Next
Generation of Academics for South African Higher
Education. The proposal seeks to address the
challenge of developing future academics and

deserves to be implemented.

0 Improve the quality of teaching and learning.

University lecturers should be recognised teachers.

0 Increase the participation rate at universities by

at least 70 percent by 2030 so that enrolments in—
crease to about I .62 million from 950 000 in 20 I 0.

0 Increase the throughput rate for degree
programmes to more than 75 percent. The
number of graduates will increase from the
combined total of I67 469 for private and public
higher education institutions to 425 000 by 2030.
As part of this target, the number of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics

graduates should increase significantly.

0 Increase the number of masters and PhD
students, including by supporting partnerships for
research. By 2030 over 25 percent of university
enrolments should be at postgraduate level.
International exchange partnerships should be

pursued and encouraged.

0 Produce more than I00 doctoral graduates

per million per year by 2030. South Africa currently

produces 28 doctoral graduates per million per
year, which is very low by international standards.
To achieve the target of I00 per million per year,
South Africa needs more than 5 000 doctoral
graduates per year against the figure of | 420 in
20l0. If South Africa is to be a leading innovator,
most of these doctorates should be in science,

engineering, technology and mathematics.

0 Double the number of graduate and
postgraduate scientists and increase the number of
African and women postgraduates, especially PhDs,
to improve research and innovation capacity and

make university staff more representative.

0 Create a learning and research environment

that is welcoming to all.

0 Expand university infrastructure. University
enrolments have almost doubled since I994 and
infrastructure has not kept up. This has a major
impact on the quality of teaching and learning.
Student accommodation in universities needs

urgent attention.

0 Develop uniform standards for infrastructure
and equipmentto support learning, promote equity
and ensure that learners doing similar programmes
in different institutions receive a comparable

education.

0 Strengthen universities that have an embedded
culture of research and development. They should
be assisted to access private sector research grants
(third stream funding) in addition to state subsidies
and student fees, attract researchers, form
partnerships with industry and be equipped with
the latest technologies. In turn, they should support
postgraduate students, not only in their own
institutions but also in those which focus on teaching
and learning as well as in other sectors ofthe post—

school system.

CHAPTER 9: IMPROVING EDUCATION, TRAINING AND INNOVATION

 

319

