302

 

Institutional architecture

The primary purpose of early childhood develop-
ment will continue to be comprehensive support
forthe holistic development ofyoung children and
theirfamilies. This requires the convergent efforts
of several departments and depends on a strong
coordinating mechanism. While the departments
of health, basic education and social development
lead in providing services for young children, poor
vulnerable families also depend on the efforts of
the Department of Home Affairs for their
children's birth registration in orderto access state
support, the Department of Human Settlements
for housing subsidies, and the Departments of

Energy and WaterAffai rs for basic services.

The state is responsible for ensuring that all
vulnerable families receive a comprehensive
package of early childhood development services.
There should be a policy and programme shift to
ensure that the Department of Basic Education
takes the core responsibility for the provision and
monitoring of ECD. Other departments should
continue to provide services in a supportive
capacity. Resource allocation should gradually
reﬂect the changes in institutional responsibility for

early childhood development.

BASIC EDUCATION

South Africa’s school education successes over the

last I 8 years have largely been in:

0 Providing universal access to educational
opportunities forthe majority of learners

O (97% participation forthe cohort 7 to l 5 years,
and 83% for l6 to l8 year olds, including
further education institutions)

0 lmprovinginfrastructure

0

Equalising resource allocation

0 Providing free education to learners from poor
households through fee exemption and the no-
fee policy

0 Expanding the nutrition programme to

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

6 million learners.

O The major shortcoming is the quality of school
education outcomes.

0 The main contributoryfactors include:

0 Human capacity weaknesses in teaching,
management and school support (district
ofﬁces)

0 The language skills of learners

O The lack of cooperation between key
stakeholders, particularly unions and the

government.

Attempts to address school education challenges
have been characterised by blame and a lack of

accountability.

The National Development Plan is aligned with the
Department of Basic Education’s Act/on P/an and
Vision iforSChoo/Ihg/h 2025 in both its diagnosis and
proposed solutions. These plans are complemen-
tary, not competing. The National Development
Plan makes new proposals in some areas and in
others it merely outlines general points of departure

to frame and guide reforms in education.

Some of the areas that need attention can be

grouped into thefollowing categories:

0 The role of teachers, principals, other
stakeholders, parents and districts.

0 Infrastructure and information and communi-
cation technology (ICT).

0 Curriculum, incentives, inclusivity and language
issues.

Sports, school health, arts and culture.

The role of stakeholders in

basic education

0 The interests of all stakeholders should be
aligned to support the common goal of achieving
good educational outcomes that are responsive to
community needs and economic development.

0 Educational institutions should be provided

