326

 

Norway spends l .62 percent. While South Africa
has excelled in some areas, such as registering plant
cultivars, there has been little increase in public
sector research personnel, PhD graduates and
research outputs. This compromises South Africa’s

global competitiveness.

Overall, South Africa’s global competitiveness
needs to be improved, and the system of
innovation has a key role to play. It is the principal
tool for creating new knowledge, applying
knowledge in production processes, and
disseminating knowledge through teaching and

research collaboration.

The nature of how and where research gets done
has changed radically. There are multiple sites of
research and knowledge production, which are
partly orwholly separated from higher education: in
industrial laboratories, government departments,
corporate research units, parastatals, statutory
research councils and NGOs, or through
collaboration between these organisations. It is
essential that all these sites of research and
innovation are coordinated and function coherently
to take advantage of new modes of knowledge
production, economies of scale and opportunities

presented by working across disciplines.

The distribution of research capacity in higher
education institutions is skewed in favour of
historically white institutions. Under apartheid, the
development of research capacity in black
universities was severely limited, and they have only
recently integrated research into their core
functions. A research mandate has only recently
been included in the institutional missions of

universities oftechnology.
Continued advances in technological innovation

and the production of new knowledge are critical to

growth and development. Achieving a competitive

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

and sustainable economy will require a strong and
effective system of innovation, science and
technology. The research and innovation system

also needs to contribute to transformation.

The Department of Science and Technology (DST)
has a number of programmes aimed at stimulating
research and innovation. They cover areas such as:
0 Space science and technology

0 Hydrogen and energy
0 Biotechnology and health innovation
0 Innovation planning and instruments
0 Radio astronomy advances.

The DST also aims to develop and implement
national programmes to produce knowledge and
the associated infrastructure, equipment and public
research services to sustain the National System of
Innovation. The creation of the South African
Research Chairs of the National Research
Foundation is an important contribution to

developing research capacity.

The DST hosts science expos annually to stimulate
interest in science among young people. This is an
important initiative and should be supported by
development of special schools for children who

exhibit interest in science.

Recently, South Africa won the right to co-host the
Square Kilometre Array (SKA), the largest
telescope. This gives South Africa the potential to
develop its capability in astronomy. There are
many other programmes and initiatives that make
up a base on which South Africa can build a strong

National System of Innovation.

Proposals for the national research and
innovation system

0 Create a common overarching framework to
address pressing challenges in the national system of

innovation, involving the higher and further

