400 000 new university graduates each year. In
200l, South Africa had 2.6 million graduates
(Statistics South Africa) or one in every l7 people.

In 2030 one in six people will be a university
graduate. This is one of the strongest indicators of

expanding access to university education.

For the increase in the number of graduates to be
meaningful, the quality of education needs to
improve. Many of the new graduates between now
and 2030 must be in the critical skills categories,
such as engineering, actuarial science, medicine,
ﬁnancial management, and chartered accountancy.
The downward trend in the number of learners
who pass matric with mathematics must be

reve rsed.

The data on the quality of university education is
disturbing. South African universities are mid—level
performers in terms of knowledge production, with
low participation, high attrition rates and insufﬁcient
capacity to produce the required levels of skills.
They are still characterised by historical inequities
and distortions. The university sector is under
considerable strain. Enrolments have almost
doubled in I 8 years yet the funding has not kept up,
resulting in slow growth in the number ofuniversity
lecturers, inadequate student accommodation,
creal<ing university infrastructure and equipment
shortages. The number of institutions that have

recently been put under administration is an

indication of the leadership and governance

challenges.

The need to improve quality is demonstrated by the
reports of graduates who are unable to find
employment and the low conversion rate from
graduation to achieving professional status in
engineering science. The Engineering Council of
South Africa reports that only l0 percent of
graduates who had been registered as candidate
engineers for more than three years attained
registration as professional engineers in the last two
years. The legal profession is facing similar

challenges.

The academic profession requires renewal if South
African universities are to expand, compete and
drive the knowledge society and economy. There is
a shortage of academics, especially in the human,
natural, engineering and actuarial sciences. The
problem of graduate unemployment in the face of
skills shortages is an indication that universities
produce graduates who do not meet the needs of

industry and society.

Higher education is the major driver of information
and knowledge systems that contribute to
economic development. However, higher
education is also important for good citizenship and
for enriching and diversifying people's lives. Quality

higher education needs excellence in science and

CHAPTER 9: IMPROVING EDUCATION, TRAINING AND INNOVATION

 

317

