Addressing policy blockages that prevent the deployment of teachers to teach where they are most needed.
Expand the Funza Lushaka bursary scheme: strengthen and expand Funza Lushaka, an important new strategy to attract learners into the teaching progession. Full-cost bursaries enable eligible students to complete a full teaching qualification in an area of national priority. Recipients o these bursaries are required to teach at a public school for the same number of years they received the bursary.
Ensure that Funza Lushaka graduates are immediately absorbed into schools. Himan resources planning should anticipate the number of Funza Lushaka graduates each year and deploy them to the schools where there are shortages. It should not be left to graduates to find placements in schools.
Develop teachers' skills and commitment: Help teachers develop better ways of delivering the curriculum using the learner workbooks that are provided, including structuring lessons, covering material in the curriculum and conducting addeddments. This should be the short-term focus and deirected at in-service teachers. as teachers gain confidence and develop skills to deliver the curriculum, the focus will move to other aspects of teacher development.
Help teachers improve their knowledge of the subjects they teach. This is of critical importance. Teacher development should build teachers' subject knowledge and provide training in effective teaching methods. Teacher development programmes should be targeted at those ares where teachers' subject knowledge is weakest.
The department, schools and professional bodies should be involved in organising and delivering teacher development activities. Teachers must also take the initiative to identify the areas in which they need further development and approach the department for assistance to access training opportunities. Courses that are in line with the requirements of teachers' jobs must be fully subsidised by the government and should take place outside term time. On completion of the course or professional development activities, teachers should earn points towards meeting the continuing Professional Teacher Development requirements of the South Aftican Council for Educators.
