  
  
  
   
 
   
   
   
  
   
  
  
   
   
  
  

equipped with the best infrastructure, equipment
and resources (especially ICT infrastructure) to
strengthen their role in countering historical
disadvantage. No—fee schools should be targeted

for significant infrastructure upgrading.

The Department of Basic Education has guidelines
for planning public school infrastructure. These
guidelines classify primary and secondary schools
into four categories based on the number of
learners: small, medium, large and mega schools.
The school environment is further graded
according to basic safety, minimum functionality,
optimum functionality and possibilities for
enrichment. The guidelines are sound and should
be legislated to ensure that they are adhered to.
Legislated guidelines will help to ensure they are not
deliberately ignored by officials involved in planning,

constructing and improving school infrastructure.

Goals

0 Eradicate infrastructure backlogs. All schools
should meetthe minimum standards by 20 I 6.
O Undertake an infrastructure audit to enable
proper planning. By 2030, all schools should
have high quality infrastructure.

Actions

0 Investigate the spiralling costs of building
schools. Chapter l3 sets out principles for
ensuring that procurement delivers value for
money

Develop measures to build schools at a
reasonable cost without compromising quality.
Expand infrastructure delivery capacity.

To avoid construction delays clarify and
streamline the responsibilities of different
institutions including the Departments of Basic
Education and Public Works, the Independent
Development Trust, provincial departments of
education, and local authorities.

Reverse the decision to centralise the delivery

of school infrastructure and develop capacity at
the appropriate levels. Procurement decision
making should remain decentralised but
there's a central role in providing enabling
structures (in this case guidelines on price,
materials and construction firms) as well as
differentiated oversight.

0 Plan new schools according to population
trends and settlement patterns to avoid
constructing schools where demand is
declining. This will require closer coordination
with local authorities.

0 The Department of Basic Education,
Department of Communications,
Department of Public Enterprises and
INFRACO must draw up ajoint plan to roll out
broadband ICT infrastructure to schools. ICT
will play an increasing role in education over
the next I 8 years, and the most crucial enabler
of ICT is high—speed broadband. Corporate
foundations, NGOs and international donors
should be invited to work with the
government to develop open source

educational software and content.

The education pact

It is generally accepted that South Africa's education
system needs far—reaching reforms. Many
corporate foundations, NGOs, faith—based
organisations, and individuals have offered their
expertise as part of a national initiative to support

schools to improve learning outcomes.

‘he Department of Basic Education's plan, the Basic

Education Accord, the Quality Learning and

 

eaching Campaign (Q LTC) and the National
Development Plan all pointto the need for:
0 More focused approaches

0 lntersectoral cooperation.

There are many interventions by the public sector,

private corporations, universities, unions and

CHAPTER 9: IMPROVING EDUCATION, TRAINING AND INNOVATION

 

313

