322

 

institutions can or should offer all types of training. A differentiated system is needed. Where there are

gaps, new institutional types should be established.

0 Identify an appropriate role for distance education in the college sector and develop a policy framework to guide institutions in developing

distance education.

Adult education The adult education sector in South Africa faces many problems:

0 Limited curriculum and lack of appropriate formal qualiﬁcations Small scale with around 300 000 participants Lack of a clear institutional identity High staff turnover due to lack ofjob security Limited resources Run on a parttime basis

Not linked to the other parts of the

000000

education system 0 Few participants acquire the General

Education Certiﬁcate.

The adult education sector is underdeveloped. It operates on a limited budget — consistently below the international benchmark of l percent of the education budget and has no facilities of its own - it shares facilities with schools. The level of qualiﬁcations of teachers in this sector has improved

as a result of the introduction of an adult education

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN - 2030

teacher qualiﬁcation via distance education by UNISA. Despite this, there is a high turnover of staff as teachers in this sector are employed on I year contracts. Quality is poor, regulation and

monitoring is non-existent.

The Department of Higher Education and Training proposes establishing Community Education and Training Centres which incorporate and transform the current public adult learning centres. The Commission welcomes this proposal. Community Education and Training Centres will contribute to creating alternative education and training pathways. The current public adult learning centres should be transfom'ied into Community Education and Training Centres that offer a variety of courses rangingfrom adult basic education to secondary and non-formal education. Community Education and Training Centres, like all post-school institutions,

must have a clear identity and purpose.

The Kha RI'Gude Mass Literacy Campaign run by the Department of Basic Education caters for adult literacy learners and has been very successful. There is a need for relevant programmes and qualiﬁcation for adults many of whom are Kha Ri Gude graduates. The existing programmes and qualiﬁcations for adult learners should be restructured to ensure they are appropriate for

their target audience. The proposed Community

Education and Training Centres will help expand

 

