Expand the college system with a focus on improving quality. Better quality will build confidence in the college sector and attract more learners. Th recommended participation rate of 25 percent would accommodate about 1.25 million enrolments compared to the current 300 000. The DHET proposes establishing Community Education and Training Centres which will incorporate the current public adult learning centres. These institutions, combined with enrolment in workplace-based programmes, should reach an additional 1 million learners.
Build a strong relationship between the college sector and industry. This will improve the quality of training in colleges and ensure quick absorption of college graduates into jobs. Continuing education is necessary for meaningful participation in a modern economy where many jobs. Continuing education is necessary for meaningful participation in a moden economy where many jobs require some college or university education. Industry should play a significant role in college curriculum development and provide opportunities for practical training. Through this partnership, the college sector will also be able to determine what skills are needed in the labour market.
Significantly decrease the number of young people who are not employed or in education and training by 2030. There are currently about 3 million young people aged 18-24 who are not in employment, education or training.
Develop and support a coordinated system for providing a diverse range of further education and training opportunities, through a range of state and private providers. The starting point must be strengthening existing institutions, with a docus on the college sector, public adult learning centres and technical high schools.
Undertake a careful analysis of all further education and training colleges, other colleges and public adult learning centres to determine gaps in the post-school institutional network. Not all institutions can or should offer all types of training. A differentiated system is needed. Where there are gaps, new institutional types should be established.
